# Effects
- Effects are an RxJS powered side effect model for Store. Effects use streams to provide new sources of actions to reduce state based on external interactions such as network requests, web socket messages and time-based events.

## Introduction
- In a service-based Angular application, components are responsible for interacting with external resources directly through services. Instead, effects provide a way to interact with those services and isolate them from the components. Effects are where you handle tasks such as fetching data, long-running tasks that produce multiple events, and other external interactions where your components don't need explicit knowledge of these interactions.

## Key Concepts
- Effects isolate side effects from components, allowing for more pure components that select state and dispatch actions.
- Effects are long-running services that listen to an observable of every action dispatched from the Store.
- Effects filter those actions based on the type of action they are interested in. This is done by using an operator.
- Effects perform tasks, which are synchronous or asynchronous and return a new action.

## Installation
### Installing with npm
```
npm install @ngrx/effects --save
```

### Installing with ng add
- If your project is using the Angular CLI 6+ then you can install the Effects to your project with the following ng add command (details here):
```
ng add @ngrx/effects
```

#### Optional ng add flags
1. path - path to the module that you wish to add the import for the EffectsModule to.
2. flat - Indicate if a directoy is to be created to hold your effects file
3. spec - Specifies if a spec file is generated.
4. project - name of the project defined in your angular.json to help locating the module to add the EffectsModule to.
5. module - name of file containing the module that you wish to add the import for the EffectsModule to. Can also include the relative path to the file. For example, src/app/app.module.ts
6. group - Group effects file within effects folder

##### This command will automate the following steps:
1. Update package.json > dependencies with @ngrx/effects.
2. Run npm install to install those dependencies.
3. By default will create a src/app/app.effects.ts file with an empty AppEffects class that has the actions$: Actions observable injected into it. If group flag is set to true then this file will be created under an effects folder.
4. Create a src/app/app.effects.spec.ts spec file with a basic unit test. If group flag is set to true then this file will be created under an effects folder.
5. Update your src/app/app.module.ts > imports array with EffectsModule.forRoot([AppEffects]). If you provided flags then the command will attempt to locate and update module found by the flags.

## Comparison with component-based side effects
- In a service-based application, your components interact with data through many different services that expose data through properties and methods. These services may depend on other services that manage other sets of data. Your components consume these services to perform tasks, giving your components many responsibilities.

- Imagine that your application manages movies. Here is a component that fetches and displays a list of movies.
```ts
@Component({
  template: `
    <li *ngFor="let movie of movies">
      {{ movie.name }}
    </li>
  `
})
export class MoviesPageComponent {
  movies: Movie[];
 
  constructor(private movieService: MoviesService) {}
 
  ngOnInit() {
    this.movieService.getAll().subscribe(movies => this.movies = movies);
  }
}
```

- You also have the corresponding service that handles the fetching of movies.

```ts
@Injectable({
  providedIn: 'root'
})
export class MoviesService {
  constructor (private http: HttpClient) {}

  getAll() {
    return this.http.get('/movies');
  }
}
```

- The component has multiple responsibilities:

  1. Managing the state of the movies.
  2. Using the service to perform a side effect, reaching out to an external API to fetch the movies
  3. Changing the state of the movies within the component.

- Effects when used along with Store, decrease the responsibility of the component. In a larger application, this becomes more important because you have multiple sources of data, with multiple services required to fetch those pieces of data, and services potentially relying on other services.

- Effects handle external data and interactions, allowing your services to be less stateful and only perform tasks related to external interactions. Next, refactor the component to put the shared movie data in the Store. Effects handle the fetching of movie data.

```ts
@Component({
  template: `
    <div *ngFor="let movie of movies$ | async">
      {{ movie.name }}
    </div>
  `
})
export class MoviesPageComponent {
  movies$: Observable = this.store.select(state => state.movies);
  constructor(private store: Store<{ movies: Movie[] >}) {}
  ngOnInit() {
    this.store.dispatch({ type: '[Movies Page] Load Movies' });
  }
}
```

- The movies are still fetched through the MoviesService, but the component is no longer concerned with how the movies are fetched and loaded. It's only responsible for declaring its intent to load movies and using selectors to access movie list data. Effects are where the asynchronous activity of fetching movies happens. Your component becomes easier to test and less responsible for the data it needs.

## Writing Effects
- To isolate side-effects from your component, you must create an Effects class to listen for events and perform tasks.

- Effects are injectable service classes with distinct parts:
  1. An injectable Actions service that provides an observable stream of all actions dispatched after the latest state has been reduced.
  2. Observable streams are decorated with metadata using the Effect decorator. The metadata is used to register the streams that are subscribed to the store. Any action returned from the effect stream is then dispatched back to the Store.
  3. Actions are filtered using a pipeable ofType operator. The ofType operator takes one more action types as arguments to filter on which actions to act upon.
  4. Effects are subscribed to the Store observable.
  5. Services are injected into effects to interact with external APIs and handle streams.

- To show how you handle loading movies from the example above, let's look at MovieEffects.

```ts
import { Injectable } from '@angular/core';
import { Actions, Effect, ofType } from '@ngrx/effects';
import { EMPTY } from 'rxjs';
import { map, mergeMap } from 'rxjs/operators';
 
@Injectable()
export class MovieEffects {
 
  @Effect()
  loadMovies$ = this.actions$
    .pipe(
      ofType('[Movies Page] Load Movies'),
      mergeMap(() => this.moviesService.getAll()
        .pipe(
          map(movies => ({ type: '[Movies API] Movies Loaded Success', payload: movies })),
          catchError(() => EMPTY)
        ))
      )
    );
 
  constructor(
    private actions$: Actions,
    private moviesService: MoviesService
  ) {}
}
```

- The loadMovies$ effect is listening for all dispatched actions through the Actions stream, but is only interested in the [Movies Page] Load Movies event using the ofType operator. The stream of actions is then flattened and mapped into a new observable using the mergeMap operator. The MoviesService#getAll() method returns an observable that maps the movies to a new action on success, and currently returns an empty observable if an error occurs. The action is dispatched to the Store where it can be handled by reducers when a state change is needed. Its also important to handle errors when dealing with observable streams so that the effects continue running.

> t streams are not limited to dispatched actions, but can be any observable that produces new actions, such as observables from the Angular Router, observables created from browser events, and other observable streams.

## Handling Errors

- Effects are built on top of observable streams provided by RxJS. Effects are listeners of observable streams that continue until an error or completion occurs. In order for effects to continue running in the event of an error in the observable, or completion of the observable stream, they must be nested within a "flattening" operator, such as mergeMap, concatMap, exhaustMap and other flattening operators. The example below shows the loadMovies$ effect handling errors when fetching movies.

```ts
import { Injectable } from '@angular/core';
import { Actions, Effect, ofType } from '@ngrx/effects';
import { of } from 'rxjs';
import { map, mergeMap } from 'rxjs/operators';
 
@Injectable()
export class MovieEffects {
 
  @Effect()
  loadMovies$ = this.actions$
    .pipe(
      ofType('[Movies Page] Load Movies'),
      mergeMap(() => this.moviesService.getAll()
        .pipe(
          map(movies => ({ type: '[Movies API] Movies Loaded Success', payload: movies })),
          catchError(() => of({ type: '[Movies API] Movies Loaded Error' }))
        ))
      )
    );
 
  constructor(
    private actions$: Actions,
    private moviesService: MoviesService
  ) {}
}
```

- The loadMovies$ effect returns a new observable in case an error occurs while fetching movies. The inner observable handles any errors or completions and returns a new observable so that the outer stream does not die. You still use the catchError operator to handle error events, but return an observable of a new action that is dispatched to the Store.

## Registering root effects

- After you've written your Effects class, you must register it so the effects start running. To register root-level effects, add the EffectsModule.forRoot() method with an array of your effects to your AppModule.

```ts
import { EffectsModule } from '@ngrx/effects';
import { MovieEffects } from './effects/movie.effects';

@NgModule({
  imports: [
    EffectsModule.forRoot([MovieEffects])
  ],
})
export class AppModule {}
```

> The EffectsModule.forRoot() method must be added to your AppModule imports even if you don't register any root-level effects.

- Effects start running immediately after the AppModule is loaded to ensure they are listening for all relevant actions as soon as possible.

## Registering feature effects
- For feature modules, register your effects by adding the EffectsModule.forFeature() method in the imports array of your NgModule.
```ts
import { EffectsModule } from '@ngrx/effects';
import { MovieEffects } from './effects/movie.effects';

@NgModule({
  imports: [
    EffectsModule.forFeature([MovieEffects])
  ],
})
export class MovieModule {}
```

> Note: Running an effects class multiple times, either by forRoot() or forFeature(), (for example via different lazy loaded modules) will not cause Effects to run multiple times. There is no functional difference between effects loaded by forRoot() and forFeature(); the important difference between the functions is that forRoot() sets up the providers required for effects.